## Transition State

Computing and drawing a PES is time-consuming, but nowadays with machine-learning methods we manage to calculate PES in an effective and precise way.

The transition state is different from a normal stable molecule. On the PES, a normal molecule stays at a minima, but a transition state stays at a saddle point i.e. normal molecules stay at stable equilibriums but transition states stand on unstable equilibriums.

Transition states are different from intermediates. Physical and Chemical meanings are trivial. In the aspect of Math, the previous one is a saddle point, while the latter one is a local minima.

The fraction of molecules enough energetic to reach the transition state is $\exp (- E_a / RT)$. Of $10^9$ molecules and $E_a$ be $50 kJ / mol$, only 1 can reach the transition state.

Thus it is reasonable we assume that the transition states and reactants quickly reaches a equilibrium, and the time-dependent step is the dissociation of TS. That is

$$
A + BC \rightleftharpoons TS \rightarrow AB + C
$$

The equilibrium constant

$$
K^\ddagger  = \frac{[TS] c^\circ}{[A][BC]}
$$

The rate can then be described as the dissociation of TS. 

$$
r = k_{1st} [TS] = k_{1st} K^{\ddagger} \frac{1}{c^\circ} [A][BC]
$$

Thus by apparency, the rate constant $k_{2nd}$, which was defined by

$$
r = k_{2nd} [A] [BC]
$$

is given by

$$
k_{2nd} = \frac{1}{c^\circ} k_{1st} K^{\ddagger}
$$

By this way, a knetic problem is reduced to a thermodynamic problem. To compute the $K^{\ddagger}$, we have

$$
K^{\ddagger} = \frac{f_{TS}}{f_{A} f_{BC}} \left(\frac{1}{c^\circ} \right)^{-1} \exp (\Delta \epsilon_0^{\ddagger} / kT)
$$

It's clear to notice that one of the normal modes of TS is along the reaction coordinates, which is very unusual. Thus we factor the partition function out.


$$
K^{\ddagger} = \frac{q^{\ddagger} f'_{TS}}{f_{A} f_{BC}} \left(\frac{1}{c^\circ} \right)^{-1} \exp (-\Delta \epsilon_0 / kT)
$$


Thus $f'_{TS}$ will be the partition function omitting the contribution from the vibration along the reaction coordinate.

Now derive $q^{\ddagger}$

$$
q^\ddagger = \frac{\exp (-h\nu^\ddagger / 2kT)}{1 - \exp (-h\nu^\ddagger / kT)}
$$

The vibration actually leads the transition state to dissociate, thus the frequency $\nu^\ddagger$ is likely to be low. Assume $h\nu^\ddagger / kT \ll 1$, we have

$$
\frac{\exp (-h\nu^\ddagger / 2kT)}{1 - \exp (-h\nu^\ddagger / kT)} \approx \frac{1- h\nu^\ddagger / 2kT}{1 - 1 + h\nu^\ddagger / kT} = \frac{kT}{h\nu^\ddagger}
$$

So our final expression for $K^\ddagger$ is

$$
K^\ddagger = \frac{kT}{h\nu^\ddagger} \frac{f'_{TS}}{f_{A} f_{BC}} \left(\frac{1}{c^\circ} \right)^{-1} \exp (-\Delta \epsilon_0^\ddagger / kT)
$$

Now we derive the $k_{1st}$. Notice that any vibration along the reaction coordinate would break the TS, and by some math and physics, seemingly

$$
k_{1st} = \nu^\ddagger
$$

So

$$
\begin{aligned}
k_{2nd} & = \frac{1}{c^\circ} k_{1st} K^\ddagger \\
        & = \frac{1}{c^\circ} \nu^\ddagger \frac{kT}{h\nu^\ddagger} \frac{f'_{TS}}{f_{A} f_{BC}} \left(\frac{1}{c^\circ} \right)^{-1} \exp (-\Delta \epsilon_0^\ddagger / kT) \\
        & = \frac{kT}{h} \frac{f'_{TS}}{f_{A} f_{BC}} \exp (-\Delta \epsilon_0^\ddagger / kT)
\end{aligned}
$$

Notice the unit. Now the unit is by molecule, and if we want a mole version, multiply $N_A$.

## Application

The expression is very appealing for we can compute the knetic rate constant by molecular energy levels. However, it is still hard to find values relative to transition states, which are nearly impossible to be measured by experiment.

One possible method is through PES, which need to be calculated by ML methods and is out of the content of the course.

Another method is to use the theory to make some qualitative predictions and rationalisations.

### Steric Factors

First we consider the steric factors. With reaction $A+BC$, we limit the motion to be linear. But if we consider $BC$ as a structureless atom, the reaction turns $A+D$, and there will be no steric limits. So it is essential we measure how each motion mode contributes to the steric factors.

Note that the partition functions for translation, rotation and vibration are different in size, with $q_{trans} \gg q_{rot} \gg q_{vib}$. The important thing we take care is not the actual values but the type of the motion. 

Write each contribution to the partition function from degree of freedom as **{trans}**, **{rot}** and **{vib}**. Using this approach, the partition function is written by

$$
f_{BC} = \{trans\}^3 \{rot \}^2 \{vib\}
$$

where the power term shows the degrees of freedom of each motion.

And for atom A, we have

$$
f_A = \{trans \}^3
$$

For transition state, with total $3N$ degrees of freedom, it has $3$ translational degrees of freedom, $2$ rotational degrees of freedom as a linear molecule, and remaining $4$ vibrational degrees of freedom, but one has been factored out. Thus


$f'_{TS} = \{trans\}^3 \{rot \}^2 \{vib\}^3$

Putting together in the equation


$$
k_{2nd} = \frac{kT}{h} \frac{f'_{TS}}{f_{A} f_{BC}} \exp (-\Delta \epsilon_0^\ddagger / kT)
$$


gives


$$
\begin{aligned}
k_{2nd}(A+BC) 
        & = \frac{kT}{h} \frac{\{trans\}^3 \{rot \}^2 \{vib\}^3}{\{trans \}^3 \{trans\}^3 \{rot \}^2 \{vib\}} \exp (-\Delta \epsilon_0^{\ddagger} / kT) \\
        & = \frac{kT}{h} \frac{\{vib\}^2}{\{trans\}^3} \exp (-\Delta \epsilon_0^{\ddagger} / kT)
\end{aligned}
$$


Similarly and less detailedly, for reaction $A+D \rightarrow AD$, we have

$$
k_{2nd}(A+D) = \frac{kT}{h} \frac{\{rot\}^2}{\{trans\}^3} \exp (-\Delta \epsilon_0^{\ddagger} / kT)
$$

the ratio of the two gives the steric factor.

$$
p = \frac{k_{2nd}(A+BC)}{k_{2nd}(A+D)} = \frac{\{vib\}^2}{\{trans\}^3}{\{rot\}^2}{\{trans\}^3} = \frac{\{vib\}^2}{\{rot\}^2}
$$

Further calculation shows that the expression is very much less than $1$. Interpretation is that when the structure is considered, the value of equilibrium constant $K^\ddagger$ is reduced.

### Kinetic isotope effects

Substituting some atoms into there isotopes, the rate of the reaction changes, which can provide information about the mechanisms. 

The major effects is about the frequency. We know

$$
\frac{\nu_A}{\nu_b} = \sqrt{\frac{\mu_B}{\mu_A}}
$$

Take $H$ and $D$ for an example, the partition function of vibration

$$
q_{vib, H} = \frac{\exp (-h\nu_H / 2kT)}{1 - \exp (h\nu_H / kT)}
$$

and similarly

$$
q_{vib, D} = \frac{\exp (-h\nu_D / 2kT)}{1 - \exp (h\nu_D / kT)}
$$

Normally we have $h\nu \gg kT$, so we approximate $1-\exp (-h\nu / kT) \approx 1$ and gives

$$
q_{vib} \approx \exp (-h\nu / 2kT)
$$

Noticing that the term is arised from zero point energy of the oscillator. Thus it is reasonable to say that only $\nu = 0$ levels contributes to the partition function.

When substituting isotopers, all other terms stays the same. So recalling


$$
k_{2nd} = \frac{kT}{h} \frac{f'_{TS}}{f_{A} f_{BC}} \exp (-\Delta \epsilon_0^\ddagger / kT)
$$


and we have

$$
\frac{k_{2nd}(H)}{k_{2nd}(D)} = \frac{q_{vib, D}}{q_{vib, H}} = \exp \left(\frac{ -h(\nu_D - \nu_H)}{2kT}\right)
$$

ZPE is $\frac{1}{2}h\nu$, so

$$
\frac{k_{2nd}(H)}{k_{2nd}(D)} = \exp \left(\frac{-(ZPE_D - ZPE_H)}{kT}\right)
$$

## Thermodynamic formulation of transition state theory

The theory offers possibility to calculate the rate constants ab initio.

An alternative approach is to use classical thermodynamics.

We remember 

$$
k_{2nd} = \left(\frac{1}{c^\circ} \right) k_{1st}K^\ddagger = \left(\frac{1}{c^\circ} \right) \frac{kT}{h} K^\ddagger
$$

and classical thermodynamics gives the relationship of gibbs free energy and equilibrium constant

$$
\Delta_r G^{\circ, \ddagger} = -RT\ln K^\ddagger
$$

Thus under standard condition in gas phase, 

$$
k_{2nd} = \left(\frac{1}{p^\circ} \right) \frac{kT}{h} \exp \left(\frac{-\Delta_r G^{\circ, \ddagger}}{RT} \right)
$$

or in solution,

$$
k_{2nd} = \left(\frac{1}{c^\circ} \right) \frac{kT}{h} \exp \left(\frac{-\Delta_r G^{\circ, \ddagger}}{RT} \right)
$$

Notice the unit.

And we know

$$
\Delta_r G^{\circ, \ddagger} = \Delta_r H^{\circ, \ddagger} - T \Delta_r S^{\circ, \ddagger}
$$

Thus

$$
k_{2nd} = \left(\frac{1}{c^\circ} \right) \frac{kT}{h} \exp \left(\frac{\Delta_r S^{\circ, \ddagger}}{R} \right) \exp \left(\frac{- \Delta_r H^{\circ, \ddagger}}{RT} \right)
$$

Remember the Arrhenius equation

$$
k_{2nd} = A \exp \left(\frac{-E_a}{RT} \right)
$$

Obviously $E_a$ has something to do with $\Delta_r H^{\circ, \ddagger}$.

From Arrhenius equation, we know the definition of activition energy

$$
\left(\frac{\partial \ln k_{2nd}}{\partial (1 / T)} \right)_V = - \frac{E_a}{R}
$$

or equivalently

$$
\left(\frac{\partial \ln k_{2nd}}{\partial (T)} \right)_V = \frac{E_a}{RT^2}
$$

Since we know the thermodynamic expression of $k_{2nd}$, we take the same partial differential term and get

$$
\left(\frac{\partial \ln k_{2nd}}{\partial (T)} \right)_V = \frac{1}{T} + \frac{\Delta_r H^{\circ, \ddagger}}{RT^2}
$$

Thus in solution,

$$
\frac{E_a}{RT^2} = \frac{1}{T} + \frac{\Delta_r H^{\circ, \ddagger}}{RT^2}, \\
E_a = \Delta_r H^{\circ, \ddagger} + RT
$$

and similarly in gas phase,

$$
E_a = \Delta_r H^{\circ, \ddagger} + 2RT
$$

