## Internal energy and heat capacity

the heat capacity varies with temperature in a strange way

At lowest Temperature only translational energy levels are occupied. As temperature rises, other energy levels are occupied and heat capacity rises again.

## Equipartition principle

> each 'squared term' contributes 1/2 RT (per mole) to the internal energy of the system.

which means, 1/2 kT per particle

squared terms are those terms consisting $x^2$, $v^2$ or $\omega^2$ terms

motions in x, y, z directions are independent, leading to 3 degrees of freedom for translation, contributing 3/2 RT for the internal energy of the system.

rotation depends on $\omega^2$, thus contributing 3/2 RT except for diatomic molecules, which doesn't rotate in the direction of the bond, contributing RT.

vibration consists knetic energy and potential energy, which each contributes RT. The total contribution of vibration depends on the normal modes the molecule has.

## Translational contribution

we are familiar that
$$
q = \left(\frac{2\pi mkT}{h^2} \right)^{\frac{3}{2}} V \\
= \alpha T^{\frac{3}{2}}
$$

thus 
$$
\begin{aligned}
U =& NKT^2(\frac{\partial \ln q_{trans}}{\partial T}) \\
=& NKT^2 (\frac{\partial \ln \alpha T^{\frac{3}{2}}}{\partial T}) \\
=& \frac{3}{2}NKT^2 \frac{1}{T} \\
=& \frac{3}{2}NKT
\end{aligned}
$$

for one mole particle, $U_{trans} = \frac{3}{2}RT$.

## Rotational contribution

for diatomic molecule, we again are familiar 
$$
q_{rot} = \frac{T}{\sigma \theta_{rot}} \\
= \alpha T
$$

thus
$$
\begin{aligned}
U_{rot} & = NKT^2(\frac{\partial \ln q_{rot}}{\partial T}) \\
& = NKT
\end{aligned}
$$

when temperature is so low that only ground rot. level is occupied, $q_{rot} = 1$, and $\frac{\partial q_{rot}}{\partial T} = 0$, thus contributing zero to $U$ and $C_V$

## Vibrational contribution

For diatomic molecule, we always are familiar 
$$
q_{vib}' = \frac{1}{1-\exp (\frac{-\theta_{vib}}{T})}
$$

In this form, we made no assumptions of the relationship between $\Delta$ and $kT$. It was simple math.

Therefore,
$$
\begin{aligned}
U_{vib}' & = NKT^2 \frac{\partial \ln q_{vib}}{\partial T}  \\
& = NKT^2 \frac{1}{q_{vib}'} \frac{\partial q'_{vib} }{\partial T}
\end{aligned}
$$

After massive calculation, the result shows
$$
U'_{vib} = \frac{NK\theta_{vib}}{\exp (\frac{\theta_{vib}}{T})-1}
$$

